with Ethan Cannon for his wonderful new collection of stories.
Tell me a little bit about your practicing medicine.
Clearly you haven't... I mean, Michael Crichton, for instance, went to Harvard Medical School, and he has found...
I was thrilled.
I was just at Politics and Prose in Washington, D.C.
I think it's the only bookstore in the country where I'm ahead of Michael Crichton on the bestseller list.
No kidding.
He's five and I'm three.
I took a picture.
Now, where is this?
It's called Politics and Prose.
That's right.
It's a store in Washington.
Yeah, it's my solo store.
I took a picture pointing at it.
How is the book doing, by the way?
I think it's doing well.
Actually, I'm not trying to get it on the bestseller list.
I don't know if it'll make that, but it's doing well.
What was the first printing?
I don't know.
It's in the second printing now.
Good.
I don't ask those things.
I don't want to know.
Because whatever it is, it's too small.
I'm curious about pursuing this dual career.
Is this something that you think you're going to... Yeah.
Because I can't do either one by itself.
It's too depressing just to write.
Is it really?
I find it.
Well, you're by yourself all day.
You know, you wake up in the morning, you tap away.
You wake up in the morning, you tap away.
You come blinking out into the light in the afternoon.
Everybody else is coming home from work.
You're just getting out of the house.
But if it's depressing, what motivates you to write?
Hard to say.
I just have to do it.
Saw Bella's line about a writer being a reader moved to emulation.
Whenever I read, I want to write.
and it's sort of unquenchable it keeps coming back you know each time I finish a story I think well that's the last story I'll ever write I mean there are no medical themes at all here so you really have divided yourself yeah well medicine is not that fictional to me you know it's such a strange environment especially if you're in it you know it's just weird using a strange Latin language all the time in these kind of
It's just a strange culture.
It's pretending to be a science.
It sort of denies its human side all the time.
It pretends it can quantify.
Even the word quantify is a real word.
It pretends it can count all this stuff up and sort of lump character in some kind of analysis.
The only way there's similar writing in medicine is that I think if you're interested...
in writing, you would be interested in medicine, be interested in seeing people.
You know, and you hear these unbelievable stories from people at the end of their lives, you know, things that you can't imagine.
You told me you had something interesting to say about the How We Die book.
Oh, yeah.
Well, it's probably, it can't be on the record.
Okay.
Off the record.
Yeah.
Just push the button.
Okay.
We won't talk that much about the medicine.
Do you have a thought about specialties?
Yeah, either emergency medicine or primary care or psychiatry.
Psychiatry might be the one for a writer.
Yeah, I mean, it would be.
The problem is that we'd probably be tempted to write about the things I hear, which is sort of, I don't know.
Do you feel that you'll probably stay in San Francisco?
Yeah, I think so.
You're from that area, right?
Well, I lived in Ohio for us when I was a kid and in Pennsylvania, but then I moved to San Francisco in my childhood, too.
Yeah, so I've been living out there.
And Barbara, by the way, what's her surname?
Schuller, S-C-H-U-L-E-R.
Do you mind if I mention that in the Quincy piece?
No, I would love to have it in the Quincy piece.
It would be nice.
It's great for me.
I'm really trying to.
catered to what they want.
Right.
Oh, yeah, she'd love to be mentioned in the ledger.
In fact, I would love to get a copy of that to give to her.
Well, just tell me where your address is, and I'll send you all the clips, I guess.
That'd be great.
Okay.
When you started, did you start this as a collection, or did you start these as a... I started this as a relief when I was writing a novel that hit the wall.
I wrote about 150 pages, and I didn't know what to do.
I was trying to plot.
I thought I needed a plot.
and then also before I got past about page 200.
You know, I always write just kind of groping around, see what happens.
And this got to about 150 pages, and I was still groping around on day one of these characters' lives.
So I figured I'd take a break and write a couple stories.
And I just discovered this link.
It was utterly coincidental or something that all of them, all of them, other than about probably a thousand words of each other.
Okay.
Yeah.
It wasn't intentional.
What are they about, each one?
I actually don't know the word count.
They're about 80 pages typed.
So what's that?
Maybe 20,000 words?
No, it's less than that.
Maybe 15,000 words each.
How many pages typed?
About 80.
15, 70, 80.
Maybe 20.
I think the whole book is somewhere in the range of 65 or something like that.
Which one did you start first?
Accountant.
Or else Batchelor Zaganzaro.
I remember I started Batchelor Zaganzaro.
Which are probably the two strongest stories.
I originally thought Palace Thief was the strongest story.
Now I don't know.
Accountant maybe is the strongest.
Why is that?
Now did you pick that as the title?
I guess it's better for a book.
I actually kind of liked Accountant.
Random House, but now I've got to be thrilled with that.
That's a grabber.
That's a great story.
You got the voice perfectly.
Yeah, that was easy to write.
Just wrote that, start to finish.
Just tapped it out.
I guess what's impressing, so many critics, people who read and really pay attention to things like voices and characters,
Is the way you're able to really, I mean, what are you, 32, 33, 33 now?
To just project the voice of a guy in his 50s, or a palace thief, a fellow 68, 69, whatever he is.
Which is embarrassing, because all I'm doing is talking, these are just my own voices.
Really?
Yeah.
Makes me think of.
Well, these are just shades of your own voices?
Yeah, yeah.
Just parts of my own voice sort of pulled out and exaggerated.
How do you do that?
Can you see what these are?
I have a vision of what these people look like, and you describe them.
Do you?
You know, I realize I have memories that I'm crawling on, only because yesterday someone mentioned somebody I knew, and I realized when I was picturing the accountant, I was picturing him.
A guy I knew in medical school, you know, he was like 21.
He always carried a briefcase.
sort of walked with his shoulders, pulled in, and his hand to the side.
To write a story, you can think of a million situations, but if you can think of a situation and a voice together, then you can write a story.
I mean, there are a lot of writers who find the writing of stories a lot harder than writing novels.
I find it the other way around.
I find this is the best length.
You know, because you can get into some character.
I guess what I like to do is get enough character in there so that some little tiny small action takes on a huge significance.
That's what I was trying to do.
I mean, anybody can write a good story about the fall of civilization.
Not the fall of civilization, but anybody can write a good story about death or something like that.
You can make something good about something small.
I mean, there is an underlying status in not just these stories, but I would say now in the body of your work.
I mean, where is this coming from?
You're a young guy.
I've always been sad.
Where is it coming from?
I don't know.
It's coming from a generation.
I mean, there's a sense of futility for all these, at the City of Broken Dreams.
Even the accountant taking that, taking the socks, you know, I mean, it's very,
thing that he did, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, he blew this big deal because he went up on the page.
What a great story.
And I really didn't think that that other story was going to be an age story.
I mean, that's right on the last page.
Did you project this as that?
No, it would have happened.
No, the age thing, I just stumbled into it later.
I actually wrote that story with the second-to-last paragraph was the first thing I wrote.
Is that right?
I think it's the second-to-last paragraph.
It's when they discover them.
It was before I had any... I wasn't thinking about AIDS.
Yeah.
I just... Right.
Second-to-last paragraph.
See, but you... So then you get nasty.
You decided to kill them off.
There you go.
But, I mean, you know, 73, I mean...
It was hip about everything except homosexuality.
It was still having quite an acceptable thing.
Chris, I was wondering if there was something from the old Navy thing, you know, too many years at sea.
A lot of things happened at sea.
I'm wondering if maybe the father was carrying some baggage there.
I didn't know.
Yeah, I mean, he does hit them.
You know, who knows if there's something... I was actually thinking of writing that, making that into a novel, and that would have been an interesting thing.
Really?
It would be very... You could probably still do something.
Yeah, I was thinking that.
The only problem is now people know the end.
Well, yeah.
I mean, Philip Watt has changed his... Zuckerman has been through any different... Right.
But that would be interesting.
I mean, why would he be so angry?
You do give us a sense of foreboding at the very beginning of that story, the year that changed our lives.
Right.
Well, it's funny to read this.
I read this story out loud.
So far it's the only one I've been reading on my tour because it's the only one you can read out loud.
Because the others don't get good until about page 60 and you can't read for two hours.
What do you do when I'm reading?
I just read about 15 pages of that.
It's hard.
I wish there were some crowd of
who want to hear us in two hours.
I'd like to read a whole story at some point, but I could never do it.
I'm the president of the Friends of the Goddard Library of Clark, and we had a book and authored in him.
We had Richard Marrius from Harvard.
I just saw him yesterday.
He was supposed to talk for 20 minutes, and he read from his novel for about 40 minutes.
I mean, they were looking at me with these eyes.
This is off the record.
I don't want to repeat this, but Justin Kaplan.
He's quite a talker.
But really, when he was talking about it growing up, it was wonderful, but then he started to read.
Is that right?
I'm just pleased to see it.
You haven't seen it in a while, I mean.
They broke the record.
Yeah, 89.3.
89.3.
Actually, let's keep going.
Yeah.
Let's go for it.
Let's shatter the record.
I've never seen so much snow here.
I really thought that was an invented language.
Now, this actually, I don't want to give anything away in my piece.
Right.
Yeah, it's actually Hungarian.
And there's an actual meaning to what they say to each other.
Oh, there is.
Did you tell me?
Yeah, I'll tell you.
Well, what they say at the end, batrzag means love and zarla means courage.
So that's what they're saying to each other when they discover it.
That's terrific.
Yeah.
I didn't want to tell anybody that.
I thought only people who discover it can know that.
I won't put it in.
I think, actually, I forget which is which.
Dr. Zahn.
Well, one of them is love.
One of them is courage.
Do me a favor.
Don't put that in.
I won't.
I just, I actually thought that they were in, but you really, I'm very good at this.
I get suckered on this.
You see, but the girl was there.
Right.
But she seduces the younger brother because she's not getting it from the older brother.
Yeah, but we don't know that.
Right.
Why is she there?
I mean, that's a pretty elaborate beard that the guy's wearing.
I mean, he sets her up in the house and he doesn't want anybody to know, but he really wants the mother to know.
The mother knows that she's down there.
I assume he may know the father.
She says the father doesn't know.
The father doesn't know.
The mother knows.
The mother figures it out.
It's funny, reading this story, you know, I always write my story, I never know how they're going to end, but when I read it out loud, I realize that, God, so much of it makes, I must have noticed, you know, the whole time, because so much of it makes retrospective sense, you know, all these things.
See, Elliot should have been the clue.
He should have been, just the presence of the friend should have been the clue.
He should have been
I'm mad that I didn't pick up on it.
I'm glad you didn't pick up on it.
Well, I mean, I told Scott Thoreau, I thought figuring out, uh, was easy.
I figured it out right away.
It was so easy.
As soon as I saw the spermicide early on.
Well, you're a physician, but I mean, I, as a former investigative reporter, know that as soon as, if there are records of phone calls being made from your phone, well, there's no mistake there.
Right.
Either he made them, the narrator, or somebody in the house made them.
Easy.
The wife did it.
Exactly.
Right.
No problem.
You told her on that?
Yeah, I did.
And he said, well, one out of four.
I said, figure it out.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Three out of four never got it.
Takes nothing away from it.
Right.
But it was, you know, he thought that he was giving too much of it.
It's a good book.
I love that book.
I actually taught that in my, when I taught writing at the University of Iowa, it's one of the books I used to teach.
Is that right?
Yeah.
His last book was very interesting, too, because the detective is a bad guy.
I didn't read it.
He takes the money in rent.
Right.
Is that a burden of proofs?
Whatever the title is.
You know, these titles, all these derivative titles, you have to be crazy.
Like Joe McGinnis' Fatal Vision, Blind Fade, this one.
Right.
There are only a certain number of words.
I like to tell her speak.
Tell me about, now, you had trouble with the novel, or you were blocked with the novel?
This novel right now.
I wanted to write this sort of 40-year thing about some kids in western Massachusetts who then become adults.
Something bad happens to them in their childhood, and then how they deal with it as adults.
But I wrote 150 pages, and they're not getting past the first day of their childhood things, and I feel like that's the wrong page for a 40-year novel.
Now you're 33, you told me.
Where do you see, I mean, you've got three books published, all...
The novel maybe wasn't regarded as highly as the stories, but you're still a kid.
Where do you see this all going?
I don't know.
I don't really think about it that much.
That's one of the reasons I'm in medicine, so I don't have to think about it that much.
It takes the pressure off.
What is writing?
You say you just have to do it, even though so many of the stories are different.
It's very hard, by the way, to do an interview on stories and fiction, I have to tell you, which is why we're dancing around.
It's much easier on non-fiction, I suppose.
Well, this kind of book is easy because it's, you know, the new spies and stuff like that and blah, blah, blah.
But anyway, this is a much greater challenge.
This will run, by the way, a week from Saturday in Quincy, and it'll run this coming Wednesday in Worcester.
My Lowell thing doesn't start for another week, it takes a little bit.
I wonder how the book's doing in Boston.
I'm sorry?
I haven't really been out yet.
I just got here yesterday.
I know Quincy asked me to do this.
I was doing it anyway.
Well, that's good.
Probably because of the Barbara connection.
I didn't know.
I mean, until this woman told me yesterday.
I was telling her.
I was asking if she had a picture of you.
I said, well, you know, ask him about Barbara.
I said, I've got a daughter of Barbara, by the way.
I said, no, she was talking about Barbara.
Well, yeah.
No, I mean, I normally look at the dedications, but I have to say it's, anyway.
Anyway, so, you're asking how I see the future.
I don't know.
Well, sometimes when I see, you know, when I see to be a professional writer, to be John Updike at 60, whatever he is, you have to have written 40 books, you know, I can't imagine that.
I can't imagine writing 10 times what I've already written.
But I hope to be able to write a book every two or three years.
I think I have enough in me to do that.
Where do you see it going in terms of quality of work?
I want to never be afraid to change.
I want to write a thriller as my next book.
Really?
Yeah.
Which probably will kill my career.
I probably won't know how to handle that.
But I don't know.
I just want to do that.
Every time you do something new, you learn something.
How about women?
Women characters?
Yeah.
People ask me that.
I'm getting more confident to do that.
I went to college, you know, I was in college from 78 to 82, and we were so sort of programmed to be scared of offending women.
There's this great fear that if I did that, I'd get it wrong.
So I've always sort of been touchy about that.
Well, again, Mary Gordon, why does she always write about
She's tried.
She's groped at it.
The three novellas, particularly, that she really did, which I liked.
I actually want to read those.
I've heard they're good.
They're very good.
I like them.
Unless you pick them up.
What do they call them?
You're going to have to end up transcribing all this stuff.
No, don't worry about that.
It's been years since I could be here.
I'll go to book stories today.
I'll find them.
I forget, but it's pretty good.
It's funny.
I was just in England.
They had this strange way.
They called me like a bloke writer, which is like, you know, sort of Western macho.
Oh, sure.
Which is not what people think here, I assume.
Well, what does that mean, a bloke writer?
I think it means like a tough guy writer.
They see you as a tough guy writer?
Which I find utterly strange.
Not everybody did.
A couple people did.
But it's utterly ridiculous.
And every...
But every review mentioned it must be sort of really on people's minds there.
Either to say, no, he's not, or yes, he is.
I think it comes from the, you know, in England, they think of American writers, they think of Richard Ford, Tom McGuane, Toby Wolfe, Raymond Carver, Barry Hanna, you know, those kind of tough dudes.
They love American writers over there, don't they?
Yeah, but I think they love that.
They think of Americans as wearing like coonskin caps and stuff.
She absolutely said she saw a difference between American fiction and British fiction.
She said, in American fiction, there is often a place of always of paramount importance.
That's true in Western fiction.
Yeah.
That's because she's reading, you know, that kind of... That's right.
That's what they think of as America there.
Yeah, well, she said, even if somebody's writing about Iowa, for some reason, Iowa needs to be so important.
Takes a big part in that.
And I said, well, what about your book?
I mean, this whole thing happens.
You have to have this kind of baronial state where you could really good shelter a kid from the outside world.
I don't think you could do that.
Tell me about baseball.
It was baseball.
Red Sox's metaphor here.
Red Sox's metaphor.
I love playing baseball.
It's the thing I like more than anything else in the world is playing baseball and playing softball.
You have two kind of fantasy camps here.
I mean, you have the actual fantasy camp, and then the island camp.
Right, right.
Where they palestine, where they go.
There is kind of a welcome-to-fantasy-island time.
Right.
I didn't realize that until later, that those stories are so similar.
They are a bit similar, but I mean, there is a striving here to reach something that is perhaps unattainable.
I guess it's sort of doing something
I guess it's unobtainable.
It's also sort of a shattering of daily restraints kind of thing, the shattering of the work-a-day kind of world, especially for this guy, the accountant, to do something like that.
Well, it was a fantasy kid.
I mean, it really was.
He's an accountant.
I mean, the encounters are, I mean, their lives are very structured.
He didn't have the guts to go into business with this guy, too.
He's chosen the safe path.
And it's gotten him two-thirds of the way up the stairs.
And then all of a sudden he has this shot.
The guy really is going to give him a deal.
He stole the socks and he can't open the... And it's a wonderful little thing.
Thanks.
I love that.
I like that moment.
Do you seek out these epiphanous moments?
I don't seek them out, really, but I feel like I can't read the story until something evolves.
And that's always been my own conflict.
I've been half incredibly safe.
I went to medical school.
Go to medical school and you're sick.
On the other hand, I wanted to be a writer, which is about as wild a leap.
as you can take.
180 degrees.
Yeah.
I mean, in terms of security.
In terms of security, that's what I'm talking about.
It's not coincidental that I'm always schlepping my column over.
Right, right.
Trying to make a week's pay.
Right, exactly.
To try and support the other things.
But it is interesting.
You think there's a duality here?
Oh, yeah.
No question.
No question about it.
And I've always had this desire for uproar, and I've
I'm always tempted to go out the back door and run.
Really?
Yeah.
That can almost be the closing quote of the piece.
I always look for the lead, and I always look for the way to end it.
I never leave an interview until I definitely have the lead in my head.
It's very nice to know how you're going to end it, too.
That reminds me of when I was working on Newsweek for a while, and I was covering the New York Mets for a really short time.
What was this?
85, I think, or maybe 86, probably 85.
You worked for Newsweek?
I had a AAAS, which is American Association for the Advancement of Science Fellowship, to be a science reporter for Newsweek.
Oh, nice.
And they said, you know, go down and cover the mess.
Dwight Gooden was having this great year, and I was trying to interview him.
But sitting up in the press box with these guys who have gone to every single baseball game for the last 10 years, what a depressing thing.
You're sitting there saying, you know, by inning number two, I've got my lead.
LAUGHTER
Yeah.
You know, I've done 800 author interviews.
Right.
I mean, the trick is that you never want them to be the same, but for the same token, you're looking for it.
Lead and a kicker.
I'd like, you know, I'd like to be a nice little circle here.
What time is your next appointment, by the way?
Oh, I have, what time is it?
It's almost 10.30.
I think I have 11 o'clock interviews.
I don't know.
Why don't you give me your address to send you clips, if you'd like?
Yeah, it's 318... 318... 12th Avenue.
And make sure you don't send it to 12th Street, because half my mail gets lost at 318 12th Street.
12th Avenue?
Yeah, 12th Avenue, right.
And that's SF?
San Francisco.
94118.
Okay.
And do you think you might need to call me to fill in anything?
Are you going to be home with me again?
No, I'll be here...
I'm going to... I'll probably write this on Monday.
I'll be in Miami on Monday.
I'll give you my experience.
You can always call Sally Hoffman, too.
I'm staying at the Hotel Colonnade on Monday, March 7th, which is 305-441-2600.
I don't foresee it to be truthful.
Normally I do a little mixture.
Right.
You've done this 500 times, I'm sure you can.
800 times.
You know, it's an interesting little package.
You're not supposed to do it.
You're not supposed to mix little criticism, a little bit of criticism.
It seems to be a saleable package, and that's what I like doing.
Let me just think if there's anything... I know among writers, just going back to that duality,
Among doctors, I'm considered pretty wild, I think.
And among writers, I'm considered unbelievably conservative.
What do the other doctors say to your physician?
Well, they all say, do you mind reading a manuscript?
You'd be amazed.
You would be amazed at how many, not people my age, because they're still struggling, but doctors who, you know, what they call attending physicians,
You know, guys in their 50s and 60s, they all want to write novels, and they have.
All the Warriors want to be John Grisham.
Right.
I want to be John Grisham.
Jesus Christ, fight a nickel for every book I've seen.
Have you read any of his stuff?
No.
Is it not?
Oh, it's certain.
It's Scott Terrell, I think, that says the franchise of that, in a way.
But I'm sure Grisham sells better than Terrell, yeah.
He does, but his stories are not credible.
This kid had been doing all this stuff, figuring out this last book.
It's the only one I read.
A Time to Kill, is that that one?
Whatever it is.
No, it's something else.
The guy who witnesses, the kid who witnesses the murder?
The witness, maybe, or something like that.
I don't know.
I remember I was sitting in a coffee shop, and this woman was reading one of the Gresham books.
I remember looking over the shoulder and thinking, you know, what the hell?
How did this guy capture the imagination?
So I looked over her shoulder, and I read one sentence, and it was,
As the intensity of the hurricane increased, so did the intensity of their sex.
Something like that.
I thought I did it.
Why can't I say that?
Would you do me the honor?
Oh, of course.
And David, use this pen, unless you have a better pen.
I have a great collection of describe books for you.
I'm sure.
I work on a thriller.
I think I might try to write that thriller.
Plus, I might try to write more of these 60-page jobs, these kind of long stories, which I like.
Are you pleased with the length of this collection, or do you think maybe you could have used one or two more stories?
Well, I had another story that I didn't put in it.
You know, I've written all my books.
I've been on the short side.
I had another story I didn't want to put in it because it was different.
It was 20 pages.
It was just a different kind of thing.
It was just a short story.
In your mind, is there a connecting theme for these stories?
The only connecting theme... No, I don't think there is.
There's a connecting emotion.
Maybe contemplation of loss, or... Maybe there lies the end of accountant.
That's a central thing for you, too.
Yeah, I'm wondering why of all the lies that might have been mine, I've led the one I have described.
How does it go again?
He says, uh, I was seen as I sometimes end with sadness.
I suppose I was wondering, although it is strange for me to admit it, why of all the lives it might have been mine, I have led the one I have just described.
How long is the, uh, that you're an intern?
Do you have a residency, Mary?
Internship is the first year of a residency.
And then I have two more years to finish a residency.
But what I'm going to do next year, actually, is they allowed me to split it.
So I'm going to work two months, take two months off, work two months, take two months off, and do my second year split over two years so I'll be able to write a novel next year.
When we first met, we still had a year, I think, a year in medical school.
Right.
And you were taking it off.
Yeah.
And I said, I hope he finishes, but I... But you doubt it.
I doubted it, too.
Are you going to South America or something like that?
Right, I went to South America.
I went to Ecuador.
I went to Quito, Ecuador.
How much time did you take off?
Five years.
I finished it.
Really?
Were you tempted not to go back?
Are you kidding?
God, I was tempted not to go back.
You know, I started my internship after being away from medicine for five years.
And, boy, was that a trauma.
I mean, it's a trauma when you start it normally.
Yeah.
Well, why five years?
I mean, were you saying, I think maybe I will be there?
Maybe I will.
Yeah, maybe I'll just be right.
Yeah, exactly.
But then it wasn't the uncertainty that got me, actually, in the end.
It was the loneliness.
It was the lack of structure.
I think people can't take freedom.
A fiction writer's freedom.
I mean, a journalist's freedom is different.
Well, deadlines.
Yeah, you've got deadlines.
You have assignments.
Look at the language that comes out of an assignment, a deadline.
That's it right there.
Right, exactly.
And you're going out and you're doing things, and you've got to do research, and you've got things that kind of makes you keep up with things.
But if you're just writing fiction, they send you some money, you've got a year to write it.
It's no mistake that there were so many alcoholics who were novelists.
Oh, yeah.
Unbelievable.
Yeah.
I don't know if they then became novelists because they lost their jobs, or they were alcoholics, or it's hard for them.
Well, I just think there's, you know, there have been studies for interesting books written on it.
Haven't they?
Oh, yes.
The Thirsty Muse is the title of one.
Really?
That's a great title.
That came out a couple of years ago.
Look at them all!
It would be easier to name those who were not.
Steinbeck, look at the poets.
I mean, even a couple of women, you know, important women.
Edna St.
Vincent Millay, I think.
One after the other.
Oh yeah, Cheever, Richard Yates, William Styron.
I knew him.
He was a wonderful guy.
Could you keep up with him?
He was a bad guy.
I remember going to a reading once with him and Styron, in which neither of them showed up.
Styron is a pain in the ass, if I may say so.
Very, very unreliable man.
Is that right?
I'll show you that.